Program Memory
When a binary application is executed,
it allocates memory in
a very specific way
within the memory boundaries
used by modern computers.
This figure shows how process
memory is allocated in Windows
between the lowest memory address
and the highest memory
address used by applications.
Although there are several memory
areas outlined in this figure,
for our purposes, we’ll
solely focus on the stack.
The Stack
When a thread is running, it executes code
from within the Program Image
or from various DLLs loaded
by the application.
The thread requires a short-term
data area for functions,
local variables, and program
control information.
This data area is known as the stack.
To facilitate independent
execution of multiple threads,
each thread in a running
application has its own stack.
Stack memory is “viewed” by the CPU
as a Last-In First-Out structure.
This essentially means that
while accessing the stack,
items “pushed” on the top of the
stack are “popped” off first.
The x86 architecture implements
dedicated PUSH and POP
assembly instructions in order to add
data or remove it from the stack.
Function Return Mechanics
When code within a thread
calls a function,
it must know which address to
return to once the function completes.
This “return address”, along
with the function’s parameters
and local variables, is
stored on the stack.
This collection of data is associated
with one function call
and is stored in a section of the stack
memory known as a stack frame.
When a function ends, the return
address is taken from the stack
and used to restore the execution flow
back to the main program
or the calling function.
While this describes the
process at a high level,
we must understand more about how this is
actually accomplished at the CPU level.
This requires a discussion
about CPU registers.